articles/you-should-use-node-test-act-two.mdx, before:

---
title: 'You should use `node:test` - Act Two'
date: 2024-01-10T13:00:00.000Z
updated: 2024-01-10T13:00:00.000Z
description: >-
  My personal experience moving from different testing frameworks to
  the new Node Test Runner. Act Two.
tags:
  - node
  - test
  - runner
  - tap
image: '/images/articles/you-should-use-node-test-act-two/cover.png'
author:
  name: Mateo
  image: '/images/profile.jpg'
---

<Image
  src="/images/articles/you-should-use-node-test-act-two/cover.png"
  width="1280"
  height="720"
  alt="You should use node:test"
  href="/blog/you-should-use-node-act-two"
/>

Hi there! 👋

I've finally decided to finish this article while waiting for my plane to come home (🇨🇴). The reason I couldn't complete it earlier is that I was addressing some performance issues on my personal blog.

<Row>
  <Column>
    <Image
      src="/images/articles/you-should-use-node-test-act-two/blog-performance-issue.png"
      width="1030"
      height="594"
      alt="Blog performance issue"
    />
  </Column>
  <Column>
    <Image
      src="/images/articles/you-should-use-node-test-act-two/blog-performance-tweet.png"
      width="1204"
      height="644"
      alt="Blog performance tweet"
    />
  </Column>
</Row>

I've been working on a still WIP [PR](https://github.com/mateonunez/website/pull/406), but Next.js and MDX aren't being very cooperative. However, the outcome is fantastic, and you can check it out [here](mateonunezx).

Anyway, let's talk about the new Node Test Runner. In the [previous article](/blog/you-should-use-node-test-act-one) I introduced to the new Node Test Runner, and I explained why I think it's a good idea to use it. In this article I'm going to talk about some of the features that I think are really useful.

## Table of Contents

- <a href="#mocks" alt="Mocks" target="_self">
    Mocks
  </a>
- <a href="#reporters" alt="Reporters" target="_self">
    Reporters
  </a>

### Mocks

One of the most intuitive features of every test framework, is the ability to mock modules. This feature is very useful when you want to test a module that depends on other modules, external services, etc.

Also the `node:test` has a similar feature that allows you to mock modules and assert the calls to the mocked functions. Let's see an example:

```js
import { test, mock } from 'node:test';
import { deepEqual } from 'node:assert/strict';
import { someFunction } from './some-module.js';

test('should mock the module', async (t) => {
  t.after(() => mock.reset());

  const mockedFunction = mock.fn(someFunction);

  const result = mockedFunction();

  deepEqual(result, 'Hello, Mock!');
  deepEqual(mockedFunction.mock.calls.length, 1);

  const call = mockedFunction.mock.calls[0];
  deepEqual(call.arguments, []);
  deepEqual(call.result, 'Hello, Mock!');
  deepEqual(call.error, undefined);
});
```

As you can see, the `mock` function allows you to mock a module. This function returns a `mockedFunction` that you can use to assert the calls to the mocked function.

The same functionality is also exposed in the [TextContext](https://nodejs.org/api/test.html#class-testcontext) object of each test. The benefit of mocking in this way is that the mocks are automatically reset after each test.

```js
import { test } from 'node:test';
import { equal } from 'node:assert/strict';
import { someFunction } from './some-module.js';

test('should mock using the TestContext', async (t) => {
  const mockedFunction = t.mock(someFunction);
  // ...
});
```

You can `mock` different types of modules, which is really useful for mocking single methods, functions, classes, and so on:

**Mocking a single method of a Class:**

```js
import { test } from 'node:test';
import { deepEqual } from 'node:assert/strict';

class CustomNumber {
  #value;

  constructor (value) {
    this.#value = value;
  }

  add (number) {
    return this.#value + number;
  }
}

test('spies on a class method', (t) => {
  t.mock.method(CustomNumber.prototype, 'add');

  const myNumber = new CustomNumber(5);

  deepEqual(myNumber.add.mock.calls.length, 0);
  deepEqual(myNumber.add(3), 8);
  deepEqual(myNumber.add.mock.calls.length, 1);

  const call = myNumber.add.mock.calls[0];

  deepEqual(call.arguments, [3]);
  deepEqual(call.result, 8);
  deepEqual(call.target, undefined);
  deepEqual(call.this, myNumber);
});
```

**Mocking a single property of an Object:**

```js
import { test } from 'node:test';
import { deepEqual } from 'node:assert/strict';

const number = {
  value: 5,
  add(a) {
    return this.value + a;
  }
};

test('spies on an object method', (t) => {
  t.mock.method(number, 'add');
  deepEqual(number.add.mock.calls.length, 0);
  deepEqual(number.add(3), 8);
  deepEqual(number.add.mock.calls.length, 1);

  const call = number.add.mock.calls[0];

  deepEqual(call.arguments, [3]);
  deepEqual(call.result, 8);
  deepEqual(call.target, undefined);
  deepEqual(call.this, number);
});
```

### Reporters

The `node:test` module includes a set of reporters that allow you to format the output of the tests. This is very useful when you want to integrate the tests with other tools, processes, etc.

Node Test Runner includes in the box the following reporters:

- tap
- spec
- dot
- junit
- lcov

To use a reporter, you must pass the `--test-reporter` flag to the `node` command:

```bash
node --test --test-reporter=tap
```

> The default reporter is `spec` if the `stdout` is a TTY, otherwise it is `tap`.

You can also use **multiple reporters** at the same time. Please check the [official documentation](https://nodejs.org/api/test.html#multiple-reporters) for more information.

The reporters are also available as modules. This is useful when you want to create your own reporter or if you're creating your own <a href="#runners" alt="Runners" target="_self">runner</a>.

```js
import { tap, spec } from 'node:test/reporters';
import { run } from 'node:test';

const reporter = process.stdout.isTTY ? new spec() : tap;

const stream = run({ files: [/* */] }); // this gonna return a TestStream

stream.on('test:fail', () => {
  process.exitCode = 1;
}); // exit with non-zero exit code on test failure

stream.compose(reporter).pipe(process.stdout);
```

#### Custom reporters

As mentioned above, you can create your own reporter. You can do this in two different ways:

- Using the [stream.Transform](https://nodejs.org/api/stream.html#class-streamtransform) class.
- Using a [generator function](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/function*).

Before we start, you should keep in mind that the `node:test` module emits events using the `TestStream` class. These are some of the events that you can listen to:

- `test:coverage`: emitted when the code coverage is enabled and all the tests are finished.
- `test:diagnotic`: emitted when the `"context".diagnotic()` method is called. <small>The `context` is the <a href="https://nodejs.org/api/test.html#class-testcontext" alt="TestContext">TestContext</a> object.</small>
- `test:fail`: emitted when a test **fails**.
- `test:pass`: emitted when a test **passes**.
- `test:plan`: emitted when all the **subtests** have been **completed**.

> You can find more information about the `TestStream` in the [official documentation](https://nodejs.org/api/test.html#class-testsstream).

Having said that, let's see how to create a custom reporter using the `stream.Transform`:

```js
import { Transform } from 'node:stream';

const customReporter = new Transform({
  writableObjectMode: true,
  transform({ type, data }, encoding, callback) {
    switch (type) {
      case 'test:start':
        callback(null, `Test started: ${data.name}\n`);
        break;
      case 'test:pass':
        callback(null, `Test passed: ${data.name}\n`);
        break;
      case 'test:fail':
        callback(null, `Test failed: ${data.name}\n`);
        break;
    }
  }
});
```

To use this reporter, you must save it in a file, for example, `custom-reporter.mjs`, and then pass the path to the `--test-reporter` flag:

```bash
node --test --test-reporter=./custom-reporter.mjs
```

> The `.mjs` means that the file is an esm module.

The second way to create a custom reporter is using a [generator function](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/function*). This is useful when you want to create a reporter that is not based on the <a href="https://nodejs.org/api/stream.html#class-streamtransform" alt="stream.Transform">stream.Transform</a> class.

```js
export default async function * customReporter (source) {
  for await (const { type, data } of source) {
    switch (type) {
      case 'test:start':
        yield `Test started: ${data.name}\n`;
        break;
      case 'test:pass':
        yield `Test passed: ${data.name}\n`;
        break;
      case 'test:fail':
        yield `Test failed: ${data.name}\n`;
        break;
    }
  }
}
```

Save the reporter in a file, for example `custom-reporter-generator.mjs`, and then pass the path to the `--test-reporter` flag:

```bash
node --test --test-reporter=./custom-reporter-generator.mjs
```

---

The **Act Two** is over. Spoiler alert: I'm working on **Act Three**, the most interesting part of this series (at least for me).

If you haven't read [Act One](/blog/you-should-use-node-test-act-one), I recommend doing so before reading the next article.

## References

- [Official Node Test Runner documentation](https://nodejs.org/api/test.html)
- [A 2024 Wishlist for Node's Test Runner](https://cjihrig.com/test_runner_wishlist_2024)

Commit message:

chore(blog): some fixes in node:test series
Signed-off-by: mateonunez <mateonunez95@gmail.com>

articles/you-should-use-node-test-act-two.mdx, after:

---
title: 'You should use `node:test` - Act Two'
date: 2024-01-23T02:35:00.000Z
updated: 2024-01-23T02:35:00.000Z
description: >-
  In this article I'm going to talk about Mocks and Reporters using the new Node Test Runner.
  This is the second article of the series "You should use `node:test`". If you haven't read the first article, I recommend doing so before reading this one.
tags:
  - node
  - test
  - runner
  - tap
image: '/images/articles/you-should-use-node-test-act-two/cover.png'
author:
  name: Mateo
  image: '/images/profile.jpg'
---

<Image
  src="/images/articles/you-should-use-node-test-act-two/cover.png"
  width="1280"
  height="720"
  alt="You should use node:test"
  href="/blog/you-should-use-node-act-two"
/>

Hi there! 👋

I've finally decided to finish this article while waiting for my plane to come home (🇨🇴). The reason I couldn't complete it earlier is that I was addressing some performance issues on my personal blog.

<Row>
  <Column>
    <Image
      src="/images/articles/you-should-use-node-test-act-two/blog-performance-issue.png"
      width="1030"
      height="594"
      alt="Blog performance issue"
    />
  </Column>
  <Column>
    <Image
      src="/images/articles/you-should-use-node-test-act-two/blog-performance-tweet.png"
      width="1204"
      height="644"
      alt="Blog performance tweet"
    />
  </Column>
</Row>

I've been working on a still WIP [PR](https://github.com/mateonunez/website/pull/406), but Next.js and MDX aren't being very cooperative. However, the outcome is fantastic, and you can check it out [here](mateonunezx).

Anyway, let's talk about the new Node Test Runner. In the [previous article](/blog/you-should-use-node-test-act-one) I introduced to the new Node Test Runner, and I explained why I think it's a good idea to use it. In this article I'm going to talk about some of the features that I think are really useful.

## Table of Contents

- <a href="#mocks" alt="Mocks" target="_self">
    Mocks
  </a>
- <a href="#reporters" alt="Reporters" target="_self">
    Reporters
  </a>

### Mocks

One of the most intuitive features of every test framework, is the ability to mock modules. This feature is very useful when you want to test a module that depends on other modules, external services, etc.

Also the `node:test` has a similar feature that allows you to mock modules and assert the calls to the mocked functions. Let's see an example:

```js
import { test, mock } from 'node:test';
import { deepEqual } from 'node:assert/strict';
import { someFunction } from './some-module.js';

test('should mock the module', async (t) => {
  t.after(() => mock.reset());

  const mockedFunction = mock.fn(someFunction);

  const result = mockedFunction();

  deepEqual(result, 'Hello, Mock!');
  deepEqual(mockedFunction.mock.calls.length, 1);

  const call = mockedFunction.mock.calls[0];
  deepEqual(call.arguments, []);
  deepEqual(call.result, 'Hello, Mock!');
  deepEqual(call.error, undefined);
});
```

As you can see, the `mock` function allows you to mock a module. This function returns a `mockedFunction` that you can use to assert the calls to the mocked function.

The same functionality is also exposed in the [TextContext](https://nodejs.org/api/test.html#class-testcontext) object of each test. The benefit of mocking in this way is that the mocks are automatically reset after each test.

```js
import { test } from 'node:test';
import { equal } from 'node:assert/strict';
import { someFunction } from './some-module.js';

test('should mock using the TestContext', async (t) => {
  const mockedFunction = t.mock(someFunction);
  // ...
});
```

You can `mock` different types of modules, which is really useful for mocking single methods, functions, classes, and so on:

**Mocking a single method of a Class:**

```js
import { test } from 'node:test';
import { deepEqual } from 'node:assert/strict';

class CustomNumber {
  #value;

  constructor (value) {
    this.#value = value;
  }

  add (number) {
    return this.#value + number;
  }
}

test('spies on a class method', (t) => {
  t.mock.method(CustomNumber.prototype, 'add');

  const myNumber = new CustomNumber(5);

  deepEqual(myNumber.add.mock.calls.length, 0);
  deepEqual(myNumber.add(3), 8);
  deepEqual(myNumber.add.mock.calls.length, 1);

  const call = myNumber.add.mock.calls[0];

  deepEqual(call.arguments, [3]);
  deepEqual(call.result, 8);
  deepEqual(call.target, undefined);
  deepEqual(call.this, myNumber);
});
```

**Mocking a single property of an Object:**

```js
import { test } from 'node:test';
import { deepEqual } from 'node:assert/strict';

const number = {
  value: 5,
  add(a) {
    return this.value + a;
  }
};

test('spies on an object method', (t) => {
  t.mock.method(number, 'add');
  deepEqual(number.add.mock.calls.length, 0);
  deepEqual(number.add(3), 8);
  deepEqual(number.add.mock.calls.length, 1);

  const call = number.add.mock.calls[0];

  deepEqual(call.arguments, [3]);
  deepEqual(call.result, 8);
  deepEqual(call.target, undefined);
  deepEqual(call.this, number);
});
```

### Reporters

The `node:test` module includes a set of reporters that allow you to format the output of the tests. This is very useful when you want to integrate the tests with other tools, processes, etc.

Node Test Runner includes in the box the following reporters:

- tap
- spec
- dot
- junit
- lcov

To use a reporter, you must pass the `--test-reporter` flag to the `node` command:

```bash
node --test --test-reporter=tap
```

> The default reporter is `spec` if the `stdout` is a TTY, otherwise it is `tap`.

You can also use **multiple reporters** at the same time. Please check the [official documentation](https://nodejs.org/api/test.html#multiple-reporters) for more information.

The reporters are also available as modules. This is useful when you want to create your own reporter or if you're creating your own <a href="#runners" alt="Runners" target="_self">runner</a>.

```js
import { tap, spec } from 'node:test/reporters';
import { run } from 'node:test';

const reporter = process.stdout.isTTY ? new spec() : tap;

const stream = run({ files: [/* */] }); // this gonna return a TestStream

stream.on('test:fail', () => {
  process.exitCode = 1;
}); // exit with non-zero exit code on test failure

stream.compose(reporter).pipe(process.stdout);
```

#### Custom reporters

As mentioned above, you can create your own reporter. You can do this in two different ways:

- Using the [stream.Transform](https://nodejs.org/api/stream.html#class-streamtransform) class.
- Using a [generator function](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/function*).

Before we start, you should keep in mind that the `node:test` module emits events using the `TestStream` class. These are some of the events that you can listen to:

- `test:coverage`: emitted when the code coverage is enabled and all the tests are finished.
- `test:diagnotic`: emitted when the `"context".diagnotic()` method is called. <small>The `context` is the <a href="https://nodejs.org/api/test.html#class-testcontext" alt="TestContext">TestContext</a> object.</small>
- `test:fail`: emitted when a test **fails**.
- `test:pass`: emitted when a test **passes**.
- `test:plan`: emitted when all the **subtests** have been **completed**.

> You can find more information about the `TestStream` in the [official documentation](https://nodejs.org/api/test.html#class-testsstream).

Having said that, let's see how to create a custom reporter using the `stream.Transform`:

```js
import { Transform } from 'node:stream';

const customReporter = new Transform({
  writableObjectMode: true,
  transform({ type, data }, encoding, callback) {
    switch (type) {
      case 'test:start':
        callback(null, `Test started: ${data.name}\n`);
        break;
      case 'test:pass':
        callback(null, `Test passed: ${data.name}\n`);
        break;
      case 'test:fail':
        callback(null, `Test failed: ${data.name}\n`);
        break;
    }
  }
});
```

To use this reporter, you must save it in a file, for example, `custom-reporter.mjs`, and then pass the path to the `--test-reporter` flag:

```bash
node --test --test-reporter=./custom-reporter.mjs
```

> The `.mjs` means that the file is an esm module.

The second way to create a custom reporter is using a [generator function](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/function*). This is useful when you want to create a reporter that is not based on the <a href="https://nodejs.org/api/stream.html#class-streamtransform" alt="stream.Transform">stream.Transform</a> class.

```js
export default async function * customReporter (source) {
  for await (const { type, data } of source) {
    switch (type) {
      case 'test:start':
        yield `Test started: ${data.name}\n`;
        break;
      case 'test:pass':
        yield `Test passed: ${data.name}\n`;
        break;
      case 'test:fail':
        yield `Test failed: ${data.name}\n`;
        break;
    }
  }
}
```

Save the reporter in a file, for example `custom-reporter-generator.mjs`, and then pass the path to the `--test-reporter` flag:

```bash
node --test --test-reporter=./custom-reporter-generator.mjs
```

---

The **Act Two** is over. Spoiler alert: I'm working on **Act Three**, the most interesting part of this series (at least for me).

If you haven't read [Act One](/blog/you-should-use-node-test-act-one), I recommend doing so before reading the next article.

## References

- [Official Node Test Runner documentation](https://nodejs.org/api/test.html)
- [A 2024 Wishlist for Node's Test Runner](https://cjihrig.com/test_runner_wishlist_2024)
